# Why Algorithms Matter

An algorithm is a _set of instructions for completing a specific task._

Just like the data structure we choose can affect efficiency, choosing or developing the right algorithm can also affect our efficiency.

## Ordered Arrays

---

The values are kept in order

A _comparison step_ is a comparison between the value being inserted and the already present value when searching under the hood.

Inserting: searching and shifting elements would take N steps. finding the value that is greater than the value being inserted and inserting the element is 2 steps in total. N + 2

- N steps: [...searching for the greater element, shifting value to right]
- The fewest steps occur when the value needs to insert at the end. N(search) + 1(insert)

### Searching an Ordered Array

Stops the search early when the search_value isn't contained within the array. when iterating on an ordered array, if the element is greater than the serach_value, we can stop the linear search since the value will not be found further within the array.

The standard and ordered arrays have the same worst-case scenario in searching when the value is at the end. N steps.

## Binary Search

Binary Search repeatedly divides the half portion of the array that may contain the item being searched for.

The Binary Search is only possible in ordered arrays.

### Binary Search vs. Linear Search

- Depending on the worst case(array of 100 elements):
  - Linear Search would take 100 steps to find search_value.
  - Binary Search would only take 7 steps, as it eliminates half the possible value at every step.
- Ordered arrays aren't faster in every aspect. Insertion in the ordered array is slower than standard arrays. By using an ordered array, you have slower insertion, but a much faster search.

> You must analyze your application to see which is a better fit. Will your software be doing any insertions? Will searching be a significant feature of the app you are building?

**Note**: Insertion in ordered arrays requires a search before the actual insertion, the search can be upgraded from linear to binary which makes it much faster. However, the standard array is still faster in inserting as it doesn't require a search before inserting.

### Exercises

1. How many steps would it take to perform a linear search for the number 8 in the ordered array, [2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 13]?

- Four steps. O(N)

2. How many steps would binary search take for the previous example?

- 1 step. The Binary search cut down the middle and 8 is found on the first step.

1. What is the maximum number of steps it would take to perform a binary search on an array of size 100,000?

- The maximum steps would require the element to be first or the last element.
