# O Yes! Big O Notation

Computer Scientists borrowed the concept of Big O Notation from mathematics to facilitate describing an algorithm’s efficiency.

> **Key Question**: I*f there are N data elements, how many steps will the algorithm take?*

> **Soul of Big O**: how will an algorithm’s performance change as the data increases?

**O(1) or O(x)** algorithms aren’t affected by increased data, as the number of steps remains constant.

**O(n)** however, is affected by increased data, the steps increase based on the data increase of data elements.

Big O Notation generally refers to the worst-case scenario.

Binary Search: O(log2 N) is the Big O way of describing an algorithm that increases on step each time the data is doubled.

### Logarithms

- Logarithms are inverse of exponents
- Exponents: $2^3$ → 2x2x2 = 8
- $log_28$ would produce the exponent 3
- another definition: if we kept dividing 8 by 2 until we ended up with 1, how many 2s would we have in our equation? 8/2/2/2 = 1. 3 twos

### O(log N) Explained

- I*f there are N data elements, how many steps will the algorithm take?*
  - O(Log N) N data elements → $Log_2N$
  - suppose 8 data elements → $Log_28$ → 3

### Exercises

1.  Use Big O Notation to describe the time complexity of the following function
    that determines whether a given year is a leap year:
    ```jsx
    function isLeapYear(year) {
      return year % 100 === 0 ? year % 400 === 0 : year % 4 === 0;
    }
    ```
2.  Use Big O Notation to describe the time complexity of the following function
    that sums up all the numbers from a given array:
    ```jsx
    function arraySum(array) {
      let sum = 0;
      for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        sum += array[i];
      }
      return sum;
    }
    ```
3.  The following function is based on the age-old analogy used to describe the power of compounding interest:
    Imagine you have a chessboard and put a single grain of rice on one
    square. On the second square, you put 2 grains of rice, since that is
    double the amount of rice on the previous square. On the third square,
    you put 4 grains. On the fourth square, you put 8 grains, and on the fifth
    square, you put 16 grains, and so on.
    The following function calculates which square you’ll need to place a
    certain number of rice grains. For example, for 16 grains, the function
    will return 5, since you will place the 16 grains on the fifth square.
    Use Big O Notation to describe the time complexity of this function, which
    is below:
    ```jsx
    function chessboardSpace(numberOfGrains) {
      let chessboardSpaces = 1;
      let placedGrains = 1;
      while (placedGrains < numberOfGrains) {
        placedGrains *= 2;
        chessboardSpaces += 1;
      }
      return chessboardSpaces;
    }
    ```
4.  The following function accepts an array of strings and returns a new array
    that only contains the strings that start with the character "a". Use Big O
    Notation to describe the time complexity of the function:
    ```js
    function selectAStrings(array) {
      let newArray = [];
      for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
        if (array[i].startsWith("a")) {
          newArray.push(array[i]);
        }
      }
      return newArray;
    }
    ```
5.  The following function calculates the median from an ordered array.
    Describe its time complexity in terms of Big O Notation:
    ```js
    function median(array) {
      const middle = Math.floor(array.length / 2);
      // If array has even amount of numbers:
      if (array.length % 2 === 0) {
        return (array[middle - 1] + array[middle]) / 2;
      } else {
        // If array has odd amount of numbers:
        return array[middle];
      }
    }
    ```

### Answers

1. O(1). fixed number of steps on every input
2. O(N) where N is the array’s number of elements. The for loop runs N times based on the array elements
3. O($Log_2N$) where N is the numberOfGrains. The loop only runs every time the numberOfGrains is doubled
4. O(N) where N is the array’s number of elements. Looping over the array's elements.
5. O(1). fixed number of steps on every input.
