# Optimizing Code with and Without Big O

There may be times when two competing algorithms are described in the same way using Big O, yet one algorithm is faster than the other.

Big O notation ignores constants, meaning that O(2N) — the 2 is dropped because it is a regular number, becoming O(N). Even tho this algorithm takes 2 times slower than O(N).

Selection sort and Bubble sort are described the same way(O(n^2)), but Selection sort is twice as fast as Bubble sort

Big O is great for comparing two different algorithms that have different efficiency to see the breadth. If two algorithm has the same efficiency, further analysis is required to determine which algorithm is faster.

### Exercises

1. Use Big O Notation to describe the time complexity of an algorithm that takes 4N + 16 steps.
   1. O(N)
2. Use Big O Notation to describe the time complexity of an algorithm that takes 2N^2.
   1. N^2
3. Use Big O Notation to describe the time complexity of the following function, which returns the sum of all numbers of an array after the numbers have been doubled:

   1. O(N)

   ```ruby
   def double_then_sum(array)
   	doubled_array = []
   	array.each do |number|
   		doubled_array << number *= 2
   	end
   	sum = 0
   	doubled_array.each do |number|
   		sum += number
   	end
   	return sum
   end
   ```

4. Use Big O Notation to describe the time complexity of the following function, which accepts an array of strings and prints each string in multiple cases:

   1. O(N)

   ```ruby
   def multiple_cases(array)
   	array.each do |string|
   		puts string.upcase
   		puts string.downcase
   		puts string.capitalize
   	end
   end
   ```

5. The next function iterates over an array of numbers, and for each number whose index is even, it prints the sum of that number plus every number in the array. What is this function’s efficiency in terms of Big O Notation?

   1. O(N^2)

   ```ruby
   def every_other(array)
   	array.each_with_index do |number, index|
   		if index.even?
   			array.each do |other_number|
   				puts number + other_number
   			end
   		end
   	end
   end
   ```
